=pod

=head1 NAME

B<derrick> -- a simple network stream recorder

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<derrick> [B<-mvVh>] [B<-i> I<interface>] [B<-r> I<file>] [B<-f> I<expression>] [B<-l> I<file>] [B<-b> I<bytes>] [B<-t> I<lines>]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<derrick> is a simple tool for recording data streams of TCP and UDP
traffic.  It shares similarities with other network recorders, such as
tcpflow and wireshark, where it is more advanced than the first and
clearly inferior to the latter.

B<derrick> has been specifically designed to monitor application-layer
communication.  In contrast to other tools the application data is
logged in a line-based text format.  Common UNIX tools, such as grep,
sed & awk, can be directly applied.  Even replay of recorded
communication is straight forward using netcat.

B<derrick> supports on-the-fly compression and rotation of log files.
Payloads of TCP sessions are re-assembled using libnids and can be
merged or truncated.  UDP payloads are logged as-is.  Details of lower
network layers are omitted.

=head1 OUTPUT FORMAT

B<derrick> outputs the monitored network traffic in a line-based text
format, where each line corresponds to one recorded TCP or UDP
payload. Note that TCP payloads are re-assembled and thus not
necessary match the corresponding TCP datagrams.

Each line of the output has the following format: 

   <TIME> <FLAG> <SRC> <DST> <PAYLOAD>

The different fields of the output are defined as follows

=over 10

=item <TIME>

This field specifies the time at which the payload has been
monitored. The time is given as standard UNIX time and encoded as a
floating-point number of seconds.

=item <FLAG>

This field indicates the type of payload that has been recorded. B<U>
refers to a UDP payload and B<T> refers to a TCP payload. Additionally,
the beginning and end of TCP streams are marked by B<T+> and B<T->,
respectively.

=item <SRC>

This field specifies the source of the payload. It is a tuple of an IP address and a port number in form of B<IP:PORT>.

=item <DST>

This field specifies the destination of the payload. It is a tuple of
an IP address and a port number in form of B<IP:PORT>.

=item <PAYLOAD>

The last field is the monitored payload. Non-printable characters are
escaped using standard URI encoding. Each non-printable characters is
replaced by %XX where XX is the character's hexadecimal ASCII number.

=back

An example output of B<derrick> looks as follows

  05.80 T 10.100.163.103:58445 91.198.174.233:80 GET /index.html ...

The line shows a TCP payload recorded at time 05.80, that is, 5.8
seconds after new year's eve of 1970 ;). The payload is directed to
port 80 (HTTP) and shows the beginning of a typical HTTP GET request.
Note that whitespaces are not escaped in the payload and thus each
line may seemingly have more than 5 fields. However, starting from the
5th field all following white-spaces are part of the payload.

=head1 OPTIONS

B<derrick> supports the following command-line I<options> which can be
used to control the recording of network traffic.

=over 14

=item B<-i> I<interface>

Record network traffic from this I<interface>. On Linux systems with
2.2 or later kernels, an interface argument of "any" can be used to
capture packets from all interfaces.

=item B<-r> I<file>

Read network traffic from a dump I<file> in pcap format. Dump files
can be created using B<tcpdump>.

=item B<-f> I<expression>

Filter network traffic using a filter I<expression>. Only packets that
match the expression will be recorded. Consult the man page of
B<tcpdump> for a description of filter expressions.

=item B<-l> I<file>

Write output to a compressed log I<file> instead of stdout. This
option can be used when B<derrick> runs in the background. The log
file will be rotated if a certain number of lines have been logged,
see B<-t>.

=item B<-b> I<bytes>

Record only the first I<bytes> of each TCP stream. The number of bytes
is computed from incoming and outgoing TCP payloads.

=item B<-m> 

Merge consecutive TCP payloads in the same direction. This options
comes handy if protocol messages are split over multiple TCP payloads.

=item B<-t> I<lines>

Rotate the log file after the given number of I<lines>.

=item B<-v>

Increase the verbosity of B<derrick> during recording.

=item B<-h>

Print a brief help screen.

=item B<-V>

Print a version and copyright string.

=back


=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (c) 2011-2012 Konrad Rieck (konrad@mlsec.org)

Derrick is licensed under the new BSD License. See the file F<COPYING>
in the source distribution for more information.

=cut
